Fjalar is a framework that facilitates the construction of dynamic analysis tools for programs written in C and C++. It is often difficult to build robust and scalable dynamic analyses for C and C++ programs due to the lack of memory and type safety in these languages. For instance, the run time system does not keep track of array sizes or whether values have been initialized. Existing frameworks based on source-to-source transformation often suffer from scalability and robustness problems due to the difficulty of adding instrumentation source code to track memory usage and initialization. Frameworks that operate purely at the binary level cannot provide rich language-level information about data structures that are useful for many kinds of analyses. Fjalar combines aspects of both source- and binary-based approaches and allows tools built upon it to safely access rich information at both the language and machine levels during run time.

Fjalar can be used to build tools that dynamically instrument un-modified x86/Linux executables compiled with DWARF2 debugging information. The ability to operate on executables rather than source code places less burden on the tool's users, because there is no need to deal with complex configuration and Makefile options to determine which source files to instrument. It also achieves greater scalability by not having to deal with the difficulties of parsing and instrumenting complex C and C++ source code constructs. Fjalar has been tested to work on executables of programs on the order of 1 million lines of code, including gcc, xemacs, Apache, and CTAS. However, because Fjalar is built upon the Valgrind binary instrumentation framework, it shares many of Valgrind's limitations. In particular, Fjalar can only work on x86 and x86-64 executables on the Linux platform, and imposes around a 100X slowdown while executing the instrumented program.